[DOC] Guidelines for downgrade (#3981)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/upgrading/con-downgrade-target-version.adoc

//
// assembly-downgrading-kafka-versions.adoc

[id='con-target-downgrade-version-{context}']

= Kafka version compatibility for downgrades

Kafka downgrades are dependent on compatible current and target xref:ref-kafka-versions-{context}[Kafka versions],
and the state at which messages have been logged.

> You cannot revert to the previous Kafka version if the `inter.broker.protocol.version` differs, or messages have been added

Reviewer: This sentence on its own (I know is clarified in a couple of sentences time) might make the reader think they can just change the IBP first. 

```suggestion
You cannot revert to the previous Kafka version if that version don't support any of the `inter.broker.protocol.version` settings which have ever been used in that cluster, or messages have been added
```

> You cannot revert to the previous Kafka version if that version don't support any of the `inter.broker.protocol.version` settings which have ever been used in that cluster,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You cannot revert to the previous Kafka version if that version don't support any of the `inter.broker.protocol.version` settings which have _ever been used_ in that cluster,
```

to message logs that use a newer `log.message.format.version`.

The `inter.broker.protocol.version` determines the schemas used for persistent metadata stored by the broker, such as the schema for messages written to `__consumer_offsets`.

> If you downgrade to a version of Kafka that uses an earlier `inter.broker.protocol.version`, the cluster will not work because it will not understand the messages.

Reviewer: An "earlier IBP" isn't quite the right language. Each version of Kafka supports a range of IBPs, so "earlier" is a little ambiguous (it could be taken to mean earlier in the range of IBPs supported by a particular version). 

```suggestion
If you downgrade to a version of Kafka that doesn't understand an `inter.broker.protocol.version` that has (ever) been previously used in the cluster the broker will encounter data they cannot understand.
```

If the target downgrade version of Kafka has:

* The _same_ `log.message.format.version` as the current version, the Cluster Operator downgrades by performing a single rolling restart of the brokers.
* A _different_ `log.message.format.version`, downgrading is only possible if the running cluster has _always_ had `log.message.format.version` set to the version used by the downgraded version.
This is typically only the case if the upgrade procedure was aborted before the `log.message.format.version` was changed.
In this case, the downgrade requires:

** Two rolling restarts of the brokers if the interbroker protocol of the two versions is different
** A single rolling restart if they are the same

Downgrading is _not possible_ if the new version has ever used a `log.message.format.version` that is not supported by the previous version, including when the default value for `log.message.format.version` is used. For example, this resource can be downgraded to Kafka version {KafkaVersionLower} because the `log.message.format.version` has not been changed:

[source,yaml,subs=attributes+]
----

> apiVersion: v1alpha1

Author: @scholzj api version check on the upgrade and downgrade procedures. We have `v1alpha1` in our examples

Reviewer 2: Aren't we normally using some variable? It should definitely be `v1beta1`.

Author: I've replaced with the {KafkaApiVersion} variable.

> [id='com-target-downgrade-version-{context}']

Reviewer 3: Typo in module ID: con.

= Kafka version compatibility for downgrades

Kafka downgrades are dependent on compatible current and target xref:ref-kafka-versions-{context}[Kafka versions],
and the state at which messages have been logged.

You cannot revert to the previous Kafka version if the `inter.broker.protocol.version` differs, or messages have been added
to message logs that use a newer `log.message.format.version`.

> The `inter.broker.protocol.version` determines the schema used in the messages written to `__consumer_offsets`.

Reviewer: It's not _just_ this, it's used to gate other persistent data too (such as the versions of JSON persisted in zookeeper).

Author: How about:

> The `inter.broker.protocol.version` determines the schemas used for persistent metadata stored by the broker, such as the schema for messages written to `__consumer_offsets`.

Unless we want to go into more detail?

Author: This section is being left out for now

> If you downgrade to a version of Kafka that uses an earlier `inter.broker.protocol.version`, the broker will not understand the messages.

Reviewer: While that's true, it doesn't inform the reader about what the consequences of that will be. We should be clear that, in general, it  basically results in a "broker cluster". The rest of this concept then goes into detailed talk about the log message format version which could easily mislead people into thinking this sentence is not really a problem. I think we should probably omit the following sentences because they're mostly irrelevant due to a broker cluster generally being a "game over" situation.

Author: We're leaving this section out for now. I'm not sure how much we will want to retain when this situation is rectified?

Author: I've updated this sentence to:

> Therefore, if you downgrade to a version of Kafka that uses an earlier `inter.broker.protocol.version`, the cluster will not work.

> If you downgrade to a version of Kafka that uses an earlier `inter.broker.protocol.version`, the cluster will not work as it will not understand the messages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you downgrade to a version of Kafka that uses an earlier `inter.broker.protocol.version`, the cluster will not work because it will not understand the messages.
```
